HOWTO.md, before:

# How to use 2DECOMP&FFT
This document presents the main features of 2DECOMP&FFT library. 
Detailed instructions on how to use the 2DECOMP&FFT library can be found
[here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/).

The 2D Pencil Decomposition API is defined with three Fortran module which should be used by applications as:
```
  use decomp_2d_constants
  use decomp_2d_mpi
  use decomp_2d
```
where ``use decomp_2d_constants`` defines all the parameters, ``use decomp_2d_mpi`` introduces all the MPI 
related interfaces and ``use decomp_2d`` contains the main decomposition and transposition APIs. The library is initialized using
```
  call decomp_2d_init(nx, ny, nz, p_row, p_col)
```
where ``nx``, ``ny`` and ``nz`` are the spatial dimensions of the problem, to be distributed over
a 2D processor grid :math:`p_row \times p_col`.
Note that none of the dimensions need to be divisible by ``p_row`` or ``p_col`` however a load imbalance will occur if not.
In case of ``p_row=p_col=0`` an automatic decomposition is selected among all possible combination available.
A key element of this library is a set of communication routines that actually perform the data transpositions.
As mentioned, one needs to perform 4 global transpositions to go through all 3 pencil orientations
(i.e. one has to go from x-pencils to y-pencils to z-pencils to y-pencils to x-pencils)
Correspondingly, the library provides 4 communication subroutines:
```
  call transpose_x_to_y(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_y_to_z(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_z_to_y(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_y_to_x(var_in,var_out)
```
The input array ``var_in`` and output array ``var_out`` are defined by the code using the library
and contain distributed data for the correct pencil orientations.

Note that the library is written using Fortran's generic interface so different data types are supported
without user input. That means in and out above can be either real or complex arrays,
the latter being useful for applications involving 3D Fast Fourier Transforms.
Finally, before exit, applications should clean up the memory by:
```
  call decomp_2d_finalize
```
Detailed information about the decomposition API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_domain.html) 
### Use of the FFT module
To use the FFT programming interface, first of all, one additional Fortran module is needed:
```
  use decomp_2d_fft
```
Then one needs to initialise the FFT interface using
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_init(pencil, n1, n2, n3)
```
where ``pencil=PHYSICAL_IN_X`` or ``PHYSICAL_IN_Z`` and ``n1, n2, n3`` is an arbitrary problem size
that can be different from :math:`nx\times ny\times nz`.
For complex-to-complex (c2c) FFTs, the user interface is:
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_3d(input, output, direction)
```
where ``direction`` can be either ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_FORWARD == -1`` for forward transforms, 
or ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_BACKWARD == 1`` for backward transforms.
We recommend using the ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_XXX`` variables, rather than literal ``1`` or ``-1``,
to avoid potential issues if these values change in future versions.
The input array (``input``) and the output one (``output``) are both complex
and have to be either a X-pencil/Z-pencil combination or vice-versa.
The interface for real-to-complex and complex-to-real transform is
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_3d(input, output)
```
If the ``input`` data are real type a forward transform is assumed obtaining a complex ``output``.
Similarly a backward FFT is computed if ``input`` is a complex array and ``output`` a real array.
Finally, to release the memory used by the FFT interface:
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_finalize
```
Detailed information about the FFT API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_fft.html) 
### Use of the IO module
All the I/O functions have been packed in a Fortran module:
```
  use decomp_2d_io
```
To write a single three-dimensional array to a file, the following call to a subroutine can be used:
```
  call decomp_2d_write_one(ipencil,var,directory,filename,icoarse,io_name)
```
where ``ipencil`` describes how the data is distributed (valid values are: 1 for X-pencil; 2 for
Y-pencil and 3 for Z-pencil); ``var`` is the data array to be written on disk, which can be either real or
complex; ``directory`` is the path to where I/O should be written; ``filename`` is the name of the
file to be written; ``icoarse`` indicates whether the I/O should be coarsened (valid values are: 0
for no; 1 for the ``nstat`` and 2 for the ``nvisu`` coarsenings); ``io_name`` is the name of the I/O
group to be used. When using ADIOS2 write operations are deferred by default, this means that before the
end of the step the data stored in ``var`` may not have been written. Overwriting ``var``, for example
when used as a temporary variable, would cause the output data to become corrupted. In such situations
``decomp_2d_write_one`` accepts an optional argument ``opt_deferred_writes`` (default ``.true.``) which
when set to ``.false.`` causes the data to be flushed immediately.
The last argument ``io_name`` is a string used to group I/O operations together, and for the ADIOS2 backend
allows for the runtime control of I/O through the file ``adios2_config.xml``, there must be a matching IO
handle to specify the I/O engine - see the examples under ``examples/io_test/`` for how this works.

There are two ways of writing multiple variables to a single file which may
be used for check-pointing purposes, for example. The newer interface is described first and allows
codes to use the ADIOS2 and MPI-IO backends, the original interface is supported for backwards
compatibility.

When ``decomp_2d_write_one`` is called, the ``directory`` and ``io_name`` are combined to check
whether a particular output location is already opened, if not then a new file will be opened and
written to - this is the "standard" use.  If, however, a file is opened first then the call to
``decomp_2d_write_one`` will append to the current file, resulting in a single file with multiple
fields.  Once the check-pointing is complete the file can then be closed.

The original interface for writing multiple variables to a file, only
supported by the MPI-IO backend, takes the following form:
```
   call decomp_2d_write_var(fh,disp,ipencil,var)
```
where ``fh`` is a MPI-IO file handle provided by the application (file opened using ``MPI_FILE_OPEN``);
``ipencil`` describes the distribution of the input data (valid values are: 1 for X-pencil; 2 for
Y-pencil and 3 for Z-pencil); ``disp`` (meaning displacement) is a variable of ``kind MPI_OFFSET_KIND``
and of ``intent INOUT``. 
Detailed information about the IO API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_io.html) 
#### Initialising the IO module
Before you can perform I/O you must initialise the IO module by calling
```
call decomp_2d_io_init()
```
somewhere near the start of the program (and before beginning any I/O operations).
The IO module supports multiple handles (see above discussion of ``io_name``), these are initialised by calling
```
call decomp_2d_init_io(io_name)
...
```
#### Registering variables for ADIOS2
The ADIOS2 backend needs information about the variables it is going to write, during initialisation of I/O operations
each variable must be registered by calling
```
call decomp_2d_register_variable(io_name,filename,ipencil,icoarse,iplanes,kind) 
```
where the arguments are described as above.
The argument ``iplanes`` is used to declare writing planes from a field - pass ``0`` for 3-D field output and the ``kind``
argument is the argument used when declaring the variable, e.g. ``real(kind)``.
### Use of the halo exchange
The halo-cell support API provides data structures and nearest-neighbour communication routines 
that support explicit message passing between neighbouring pencils. 
```
  call update_halo(var, var_halo, level)
```
Here the first parameter ``var``, a 3D input array, contains the normal pencil-distributed data as defined by the decomposition library. 
After the subroutine call, the second parameter ``var_halo`` returns all original data plus halo data from the neighbouring processes.
The third parameter level defines how many layers of overlapping are required. 
Detailed information about the halo module are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_halo.html)

Commit message:

Add HOWTO instructions to open ADIOS2 output with Paraview

HOWTO.md, after:

# How to use 2DECOMP&FFT
This document presents the main features of 2DECOMP&FFT library. 
Detailed instructions on how to use the 2DECOMP&FFT library can be found
[here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/).

The 2D Pencil Decomposition API is defined with three Fortran module which should be used by applications as:
```
  use decomp_2d_constants
  use decomp_2d_mpi
  use decomp_2d
```
where ``use decomp_2d_constants`` defines all the parameters, ``use decomp_2d_mpi`` introduces all the MPI 
related interfaces and ``use decomp_2d`` contains the main decomposition and transposition APIs. The library is initialized using
```
  call decomp_2d_init(nx, ny, nz, p_row, p_col)
```
where ``nx``, ``ny`` and ``nz`` are the spatial dimensions of the problem, to be distributed over
a 2D processor grid :math:`p_row \times p_col`.
Note that none of the dimensions need to be divisible by ``p_row`` or ``p_col`` however a load imbalance will occur if not.
In case of ``p_row=p_col=0`` an automatic decomposition is selected among all possible combination available.
A key element of this library is a set of communication routines that actually perform the data transpositions.
As mentioned, one needs to perform 4 global transpositions to go through all 3 pencil orientations
(i.e. one has to go from x-pencils to y-pencils to z-pencils to y-pencils to x-pencils)
Correspondingly, the library provides 4 communication subroutines:
```
  call transpose_x_to_y(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_y_to_z(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_z_to_y(var_in,var_out)
  call transpose_y_to_x(var_in,var_out)
```
The input array ``var_in`` and output array ``var_out`` are defined by the code using the library
and contain distributed data for the correct pencil orientations.

Note that the library is written using Fortran's generic interface so different data types are supported
without user input. That means in and out above can be either real or complex arrays,
the latter being useful for applications involving 3D Fast Fourier Transforms.
Finally, before exit, applications should clean up the memory by:
```
  call decomp_2d_finalize
```
Detailed information about the decomposition API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_domain.html) 
### Use of the FFT module
To use the FFT programming interface, first of all, one additional Fortran module is needed:
```
  use decomp_2d_fft
```
Then one needs to initialise the FFT interface using
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_init(pencil, n1, n2, n3)
```
where ``pencil=PHYSICAL_IN_X`` or ``PHYSICAL_IN_Z`` and ``n1, n2, n3`` is an arbitrary problem size
that can be different from :math:`nx\times ny\times nz`.
For complex-to-complex (c2c) FFTs, the user interface is:
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_3d(input, output, direction)
```
where ``direction`` can be either ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_FORWARD == -1`` for forward transforms, 
or ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_BACKWARD == 1`` for backward transforms.
We recommend using the ``DECOMP_2D_FFT_XXX`` variables, rather than literal ``1`` or ``-1``,
to avoid potential issues if these values change in future versions.
The input array (``input``) and the output one (``output``) are both complex
and have to be either a X-pencil/Z-pencil combination or vice-versa.
The interface for real-to-complex and complex-to-real transform is
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_3d(input, output)
```
If the ``input`` data are real type a forward transform is assumed obtaining a complex ``output``.
Similarly a backward FFT is computed if ``input`` is a complex array and ``output`` a real array.
Finally, to release the memory used by the FFT interface:
```
  call decomp_2d_fft_finalize
```
Detailed information about the FFT API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_fft.html) 
### Use of the IO module
All the I/O functions have been packed in a Fortran module:
```
  use decomp_2d_io
```
To write a single three-dimensional array to a file, the following call to a subroutine can be used:
```
  call decomp_2d_write_one(ipencil,var,directory,filename,icoarse,io_name)
```
where ``ipencil`` describes how the data is distributed (valid values are: 1 for X-pencil; 2 for
Y-pencil and 3 for Z-pencil); ``var`` is the data array to be written on disk, which can be either real or
complex; ``directory`` is the path to where I/O should be written; ``filename`` is the name of the
file to be written; ``icoarse`` indicates whether the I/O should be coarsened (valid values are: 0
for no; 1 for the ``nstat`` and 2 for the ``nvisu`` coarsenings); ``io_name`` is the name of the I/O
group to be used. When using ADIOS2 write operations are deferred by default, this means that before the
end of the step the data stored in ``var`` may not have been written. Overwriting ``var``, for example
when used as a temporary variable, would cause the output data to become corrupted. In such situations
``decomp_2d_write_one`` accepts an optional argument ``opt_deferred_writes`` (default ``.true.``) which
when set to ``.false.`` causes the data to be flushed immediately.
The last argument ``io_name`` is a string used to group I/O operations together, and for the ADIOS2 backend
allows for the runtime control of I/O through the file ``adios2_config.xml``, there must be a matching IO
handle to specify the I/O engine - see the examples under ``examples/io_test/`` for how this works.

There are two ways of writing multiple variables to a single file which may
be used for check-pointing purposes, for example. The newer interface is described first and allows
codes to use the ADIOS2 and MPI-IO backends, the original interface is supported for backwards
compatibility.

When ``decomp_2d_write_one`` is called, the ``directory`` and ``io_name`` are combined to check
whether a particular output location is already opened, if not then a new file will be opened and
written to - this is the "standard" use.  If, however, a file is opened first then the call to
``decomp_2d_write_one`` will append to the current file, resulting in a single file with multiple
fields.  Once the check-pointing is complete the file can then be closed.

The original interface for writing multiple variables to a file, only
supported by the MPI-IO backend, takes the following form:
```
   call decomp_2d_write_var(fh,disp,ipencil,var)
```
where ``fh`` is a MPI-IO file handle provided by the application (file opened using ``MPI_FILE_OPEN``);
``ipencil`` describes the distribution of the input data (valid values are: 1 for X-pencil; 2 for
Y-pencil and 3 for Z-pencil); ``disp`` (meaning displacement) is a variable of ``kind MPI_OFFSET_KIND``
and of ``intent INOUT``. 
Detailed information about the IO API are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_io.html) 
#### Initialising the IO module
Before you can perform I/O you must initialise the IO module by calling
```
call decomp_2d_io_init()
```
somewhere near the start of the program (and before beginning any I/O operations).
The IO module supports multiple handles (see above discussion of ``io_name``), these are initialised by calling
```
call decomp_2d_init_io(io_name)
...
```
#### Registering variables for ADIOS2
The ADIOS2 backend needs information about the variables it is going to write, during initialisation of I/O operations
each variable must be registered by calling
```
call decomp_2d_register_variable(io_name,filename,ipencil,icoarse,iplanes,kind) 
```
where the arguments are described as above.
The argument ``iplanes`` is used to declare writing planes from a field - pass ``0`` for 3-D field output and the ``kind``
argument is the argument used when declaring the variable, e.g. ``real(kind)``.
#### Opening an ADIOS2 file
Data written using the ADIOS2 ``.bp<x>`` engines are stored in a directory, e.g. ``data.bp4``.
To visualise this using ParaView open the directory in the file open prompt,
this will ensure the ParaView reader correctly reads the ``vtk.xml`` file
describing the problem dimensions.
### Use of the halo exchange
The halo-cell support API provides data structures and nearest-neighbour communication routines 
that support explicit message passing between neighbouring pencils. 
```
  call update_halo(var, var_halo, level)
```
Here the first parameter ``var``, a 3D input array, contains the normal pencil-distributed data as defined by the decomposition library. 
After the subroutine call, the second parameter ``var_halo`` returns all original data plus halo data from the neighbouring processes.
The third parameter level defines how many layers of overlapping are required. 
Detailed information about the halo module are available [here](https://2decomp-fft.github.io/pages/api_halo.html)
