INSTALL.md, before:

# Building, installing and linking 2DECOMP&FFT

The library 2decomp is a Fortran library compatible with the Fortran 2008 standard.
It requires a MPI library compatible with MPI-2.0 with extended Fortran support.
The following [optional libraries](#optional-dependencies) can be used :

- ADIOS2, version 2.9.0 was tested
- FFTW3, version 3.3.10 was tested
- Intel oneMKL (oneAPI Math Kernel Library), version 2023.0.0 was tested
- Nvidia GPU-related libraries, NVHPC version 22.7 and CUDA version 11.8 were tested
- Caliper, version 2.9.1 was tested

## Building

The build system is driven by `cmake`. It is good practice to directly point to the 
MPI Fortran wrapper that you would like to use to guarantee consistency between Fortran compiler and MPI. 
This can be done by setting the default Fortran environmental variable 
```
export FC=my_mpif90
```
To generate the build system run
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DOPTION1 -DOPTION2 ...
```
If the directory does not exist it will be generated and it will contain the configuration files. 
The configuration can be further
edited by using the `ccmake` utility as
```
ccmake $path_to_build_directory
```
and editing as desired, variables that are likely of interest are: `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` and `FFT_Choice`;
additional variables can be shown by entering "advanced mode" by pressing `t`.
By default a `RELEASE` build will built, other options for `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` are `DEBUG` and `DEV` which
turn on debugging flags and additionally try to catch coding errors at compile time, respectively.
The behaviour of debug and development versions of the library can be changed before the
initialization using the variable ``decomp_debug`` or the environment variable ``DECOMP_2D_DEBUG``.
The value provided with the environment variable must be a positive integer below 9999.

Two `BUILD_TARGETS` are available namely `mpi` and `gpu`.  For the `mpi` target no additional 
options should be required. whereas for `gpu` extra options are necessary at the configure stage. 
Please see section [GPU Compilation](#gpu-compilation)

Once the build system has been configured, you can build 2DECOMP&FFT` by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory -j <nproc>
```
appending `-v` will display additional information about the build, such as compiler flags.

After building the library can be tested. Please see section [Testing and examples](#testing-and-examples)

Options can be added to change the level of verbosity. Finally, the build library can be installed by running 
```
cmake --install $path_to_build_directory
```
The default location for `libdecomp2d.a` is `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib` 
or `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib64` unless the variable `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is modified.
The module files generated by the build process will similarly be installed to 
`$path_to_build_directory/opt/install`, 
users of the library should add this to the include paths for their program.

As indicated above, by default a static `libdecomp2d.a` will be compiled, 
if desired a shared library can be built by setting `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON` either on the command line:
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON
```
or by editing the configuration using `ccmake`.
This might be useful for a centralised install supporting multiple users that is upgraded over time.

Occasionally a clean build is required, this can be performed by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory --target clean
```

## GPU compilation

The library can perform multi GPU offoloading using the NVHPC compiler suite for NVIDIA hardware. 
The implementation is based on CUDA-aware MPI and NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL).
The FFT is based on cuFFT. 

To properly configure for GPU build the following needs to be used 
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_TARGET=gpu
```
Note, further configuration can be performed using `ccmake`, however the initial configuration of GPU builds must include the `-DBUILD_TARGET=gpu` flag as shown above.

By default CUDA aware MPI will be used together with `cuFFT` for the FFT library. The configure will automatically look for the GPU architecture available on the system. If you are building on a HPC system please use a computing node for the installation. Useful variables to be added are 

 - `-DENABLE_NCCL=yes` to activate the NCCL collectives
 - `-DENABLE_MANAGED=yes` to activate the automatic memory management form the NVHPC compiler
If you are getting the following error
```
-- The CUDA compiler identification is unknown  
CMake Error at /usr/share/cmake/Modules/CMakeDetermineCUDACompiler.cmake:633 (message):  
Failed to detect a default CUDA architecture. 
```
It is possible that your default C compiler is too recent and not supported by `nvcc` . You might be able to solve the issue by adding 
 - `-DCMAKE_CUDA_HOST_COMPILER=$supported_gcc`
 
 At the moment the supported CUDA host compilers are `gcc11` and earlier. 

## Linking from external codes

### Codes using Makefiles

When building a code that links 2DECOMP&FFT using a Makefile you will need to add the include and link paths as appropriate (`inlude/` and `lib/` under the installation directory, respectively).
```
DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

OBJ = my_exec.o

my_exec: $(OBJ)
	$(F90) -o $@ $(OBJ) $(LIBS)

```
In case 2DECOMP&FFT has been compiled with an external FFT, such as FFTW3, `LIBS` 
should also contain the following 
```
FFTW3_PATH=/my_path_to_FFTW/lib
LIBFFT=-L$(FFTW3_PATH) -lfftw3 -lfftw3f
LIBS += $(LIBFFT)
```
In case of 2DECOMP&FFT compiled for GPU with NVHPC, linking against cuFFT is mandatory 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft
```
In case of NCCL the following is required 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft,nccl 
```
It is also possible to drive the build and installation of 2decomp-fft from a Makefile such as in the following example code
```
FC = mpif90
BUILD = Release

DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

# Building libdecomp.a
$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a:
	FC=$(FC) cmake -S $(DECOMP_ROOT) -B $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=$(BUILD) -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target decomp2d
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target install

# Clean libdecomp.a
clean-decomp:
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target clean
	rm -f $(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a
```

## Profiling

Profiling can be activated via `cmake` configuration, 
the recommended approach is to run the initial configuration as follows:
```
export caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper
export CXX=mpicxx
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
where `ENABLE_PROFILER` is set to the profiling tool desired, currently supported values are: `caliper`.
Note that when using `caliper` a C++ compiler is required as indicated in the above command line.

## Miscellaneous

### Compiling with Intel oneAPI

In order to compile with the MKL libraries the following environmental variable needs to be set up
```
export MKL_DIR=${MKLROOT}/lib/cmake/mkl
```
and select the MKL backend by setting `FFT_Choice=mkl`.

To use the new IntelLLVM compiler specify it as the Fortran compiler using
```
export export FC="mpiifort -fc=ifx"
```
and when building with ADIOS2 support you must also specify the `C` and `CXX` compilers
```
export CXX="mpiicpc -cxx=icpx"
export CC="mpiicc -cc=icx"
```

### List of preprocessor variables

#### ADIOS2

This variable is automatically added in builds with the adios2 IO backend.

#### DEBUG

This variable is automatically added in debug and dev builds. Extra information is printed when it is present.

#### DOUBLE_PREC

When this variable is not present, the library uses single precision. When it is present, the library uses double precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `DOUBLE_PRECISION`.

#### SAVE_SINGLE

This variable is valid for double precision builds only. When it is present, snapshots are written in single precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `SINGLE_PRECISION_OUTPUT`.

#### PROFILER

This variable is automatically added when selecting the profiler. It activates the profiling sections of the code.

#### EVEN

This preprocessor variable is not valid for GPU builds. It leads to padded alltoall operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `EVEN`.

#### OVERWRITE

This variable leads to overwrite the input array when computing FFT. The support of this flag does not always correspond to in-place transforms, depending on the FFT backend selected, as described above. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `ENABLE_INPLACE`.

#### HALO_DEBUG

This variable is used to debug the halo operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `HALO_DEBUG`.

#### _GPU

This variable is automatically added in GPU builds.

#### _NCCL

This variable is valid only for GPU builds. The NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) implements multi-GPU and multi-node communication primitives optimized for NVIDIA GPUs and Networking.

## Optional dependencies

### ADIOS2

The library [adios2](https://adios2.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) can be used as a backend for IO. The version 2.9.0 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/ornladios/ADIOS2/archive/refs/tags/v2.9.0.tar.gz). Below are build instructions for the library. However, it is recommended to use the one provided by the administrators of the computing centre if available.

```
wget https://github.com/ornladios/ADIOS2/archive/refs/tags/v2.9.0.tar.gz
tar xzf v2.9.0.tar.gz
mkdir 2.9.0_tmp && cd 2.9.0_tmp
CC=mpicc CXX=mpicxx FC=mpif90 cmake -S ../ADIOS2-2.9.0 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../2.9.0_bld
make -j
make -j test
make -j install
```

To build 2DECOMP&FFT with the adios2 IO backend, one can provide the package configuration for adios2 
in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, 
this should be found under `/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2`. 
One can also provide the option `-Dadios2_DIR=/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2`. 
Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B ./build -DIO_BACKEND=adios2 -Dadios2_DIR=/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`. Please note that the support for ADIOS2 is not complete. Currently, for a given IO operation, when the ADIOS2 backend is not supported, the MPI backend is used.

### FFTW

The library [fftw](http://www.fftw.org/index.html) can be used as a backend for the FFT engine. 
The version 3.3.10 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded 
[here](http://www.fftw.org/download.html). 
Please note that one should build fftw and decomp2d against the same compilers. 
For build instructions, please check [here](http://www.fftw.org/fftw3_doc/Installation-on-Unix.html). 
Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library in double precision 
(add `--enable-single` for a single precision build):

```
wget http://www.fftw.org/fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
tar xzf fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
mkdir fftw-3.3.10_tmp && cd fftw-3.3.10_tmp
../fftw-3.3.10/configure --prefix=xxxxxxx/fftw3/fftw-3.3.10_bld --enable-shared
make -j
make -j check
make install
```
Please note that the resulting build is not compatible with `cmake` 
(https://github.com/FFTW/fftw3/issues/130). 
As a workaround, one can open the file 
`/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/cmake/fftw3/FFTW3Config.cmake` 
and comment the line
```
include ("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/FFTW3LibraryDepends.cmake")
```

To build `2decomp&fft` against fftw3, one can provide the package configuration for fftw3 
in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, 
this should be found under `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/pkgconfig`. 
One can also provide the option `-DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install`. 
Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B build -DFFT_Choice=<fftw|fftw_f03> -DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`.

Note the legacy `fftw` interface lacks interface definitions 
and will fail when stricter compilation flags are used (e.g. when `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Dev`) 
for this it is recommended to use `fftw_f03` which provides proper interfaces.

### Caliper

The library [caliper](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper) can be used to profile the execution of the code. 
The version 2.9.1 was tested and is supported, version 2.8.0 has also been tested 
and is still expected to work. 
Please note that one must build caliper and decomp2d against the same C/C++/Fortran 
compilers and MPI libray. 
For build instructions, please check 
[here](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper#building-and-installing) 
and [here](https://software.llnl.gov/Caliper/CaliperBasics.html#build-and-install). 
Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library using the GNU compilers:

```
git clone https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper.git caliper_github
cd caliper_github
git checkout v2.9.1
mkdir build && cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../../caliper_build_2.9.1 -DWITH_FORTRAN=yes -DWITH_MPI=yes -DBUILD_TESTING=yes ../
make -j
make test
make install
```

After installing Caliper ensure to set `caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper`.
Following this the `2decomp-fft` build can be configured to use Caliper profiling as
```
cmake -S . -B -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
or by modifying the configuration to set `ENABLE_PROFILER=caliper` via `ccmake`.

Commit message:

Add description of HALO_GLOBAL in INSTALL.md

INSTALL.md, after:

# Building, installing and linking 2DECOMP&FFT

The library 2decomp is a Fortran library compatible with the Fortran 2008 standard.
It requires a MPI library compatible with MPI-2.0 with extended Fortran support.
The following [optional libraries](#optional-dependencies) can be used :

- ADIOS2, version 2.9.0 was tested
- FFTW3, version 3.3.10 was tested
- Intel oneMKL (oneAPI Math Kernel Library), version 2023.0.0 was tested
- Nvidia GPU-related libraries, NVHPC version 22.7 and CUDA version 11.8 were tested
- Caliper, version 2.9.1 was tested

## Building

The build system is driven by `cmake`. It is good practice to directly point to the 
MPI Fortran wrapper that you would like to use to guarantee consistency between Fortran compiler and MPI. 
This can be done by setting the default Fortran environmental variable 
```
export FC=my_mpif90
```
To generate the build system run
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DOPTION1 -DOPTION2 ...
```
If the directory does not exist it will be generated and it will contain the configuration files. 
The configuration can be further
edited by using the `ccmake` utility as
```
ccmake $path_to_build_directory
```
and editing as desired, variables that are likely of interest are: `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` and `FFT_Choice`;
additional variables can be shown by entering "advanced mode" by pressing `t`.
By default a `RELEASE` build will built, other options for `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` are `DEBUG` and `DEV` which
turn on debugging flags and additionally try to catch coding errors at compile time, respectively.
The behaviour of debug and development versions of the library can be changed before the
initialization using the variable ``decomp_debug`` or the environment variable ``DECOMP_2D_DEBUG``.
The value provided with the environment variable must be a positive integer below 9999.

Two `BUILD_TARGETS` are available namely `mpi` and `gpu`.  For the `mpi` target no additional 
options should be required. whereas for `gpu` extra options are necessary at the configure stage. 
Please see section [GPU Compilation](#gpu-compilation)

Once the build system has been configured, you can build 2DECOMP&FFT` by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory -j <nproc>
```
appending `-v` will display additional information about the build, such as compiler flags.

After building the library can be tested. Please see section [Testing and examples](#testing-and-examples)

Options can be added to change the level of verbosity. Finally, the build library can be installed by running 
```
cmake --install $path_to_build_directory
```
The default location for `libdecomp2d.a` is `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib` 
or `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib64` unless the variable `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is modified.
The module files generated by the build process will similarly be installed to 
`$path_to_build_directory/opt/install`, 
users of the library should add this to the include paths for their program.

As indicated above, by default a static `libdecomp2d.a` will be compiled, 
if desired a shared library can be built by setting `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON` either on the command line:
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON
```
or by editing the configuration using `ccmake`.
This might be useful for a centralised install supporting multiple users that is upgraded over time.

Occasionally a clean build is required, this can be performed by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory --target clean
```

## GPU compilation

The library can perform multi GPU offoloading using the NVHPC compiler suite for NVIDIA hardware. 
The implementation is based on CUDA-aware MPI and NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL).
The FFT is based on cuFFT. 

To properly configure for GPU build the following needs to be used 
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_TARGET=gpu
```
Note, further configuration can be performed using `ccmake`, however the initial configuration of GPU builds must include the `-DBUILD_TARGET=gpu` flag as shown above.

By default CUDA aware MPI will be used together with `cuFFT` for the FFT library. The configure will automatically look for the GPU architecture available on the system. If you are building on a HPC system please use a computing node for the installation. Useful variables to be added are 

 - `-DENABLE_NCCL=yes` to activate the NCCL collectives
 - `-DENABLE_MANAGED=yes` to activate the automatic memory management form the NVHPC compiler
If you are getting the following error
```
-- The CUDA compiler identification is unknown  
CMake Error at /usr/share/cmake/Modules/CMakeDetermineCUDACompiler.cmake:633 (message):  
Failed to detect a default CUDA architecture. 
```
It is possible that your default C compiler is too recent and not supported by `nvcc` . You might be able to solve the issue by adding 
 - `-DCMAKE_CUDA_HOST_COMPILER=$supported_gcc`
 
 At the moment the supported CUDA host compilers are `gcc11` and earlier. 

## Linking from external codes

### Codes using Makefiles

When building a code that links 2DECOMP&FFT using a Makefile you will need to add the include and link paths as appropriate (`inlude/` and `lib/` under the installation directory, respectively).
```
DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

OBJ = my_exec.o

my_exec: $(OBJ)
	$(F90) -o $@ $(OBJ) $(LIBS)

```
In case 2DECOMP&FFT has been compiled with an external FFT, such as FFTW3, `LIBS` 
should also contain the following 
```
FFTW3_PATH=/my_path_to_FFTW/lib
LIBFFT=-L$(FFTW3_PATH) -lfftw3 -lfftw3f
LIBS += $(LIBFFT)
```
In case of 2DECOMP&FFT compiled for GPU with NVHPC, linking against cuFFT is mandatory 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft
```
In case of NCCL the following is required 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft,nccl 
```
It is also possible to drive the build and installation of 2decomp-fft from a Makefile such as in the following example code
```
FC = mpif90
BUILD = Release

DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

# Building libdecomp.a
$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a:
	FC=$(FC) cmake -S $(DECOMP_ROOT) -B $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=$(BUILD) -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target decomp2d
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target install

# Clean libdecomp.a
clean-decomp:
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target clean
	rm -f $(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a
```

## Profiling

Profiling can be activated via `cmake` configuration, 
the recommended approach is to run the initial configuration as follows:
```
export caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper
export CXX=mpicxx
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
where `ENABLE_PROFILER` is set to the profiling tool desired, currently supported values are: `caliper`.
Note that when using `caliper` a C++ compiler is required as indicated in the above command line.

## Miscellaneous

### Compiling with Intel oneAPI

In order to compile with the MKL libraries the following environmental variable needs to be set up
```
export MKL_DIR=${MKLROOT}/lib/cmake/mkl
```
and select the MKL backend by setting `FFT_Choice=mkl`.

To use the new IntelLLVM compiler specify it as the Fortran compiler using
```
export export FC="mpiifort -fc=ifx"
```
and when building with ADIOS2 support you must also specify the `C` and `CXX` compilers
```
export CXX="mpiicpc -cxx=icpx"
export CC="mpiicc -cc=icx"
```

### List of preprocessor variables

#### ADIOS2

This variable is automatically added in builds with the adios2 IO backend.

#### DEBUG

This variable is automatically added in debug and dev builds. Extra information is printed when it is present.

#### DOUBLE_PREC

When this variable is not present, the library uses single precision. When it is present, the library uses double precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `DOUBLE_PRECISION`.

#### SAVE_SINGLE

This variable is valid for double precision builds only. When it is present, snapshots are written in single precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `SINGLE_PRECISION_OUTPUT`.

#### PROFILER

This variable is automatically added when selecting the profiler. It activates the profiling sections of the code.

#### EVEN

This preprocessor variable is not valid for GPU builds. It leads to padded alltoall operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `EVEN`.

#### OVERWRITE

This variable leads to overwrite the input array when computing FFT. The support of this flag does not always correspond to in-place transforms, depending on the FFT backend selected, as described above. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `ENABLE_INPLACE`.

#### HALO_DEBUG

This variable is used to debug the halo operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `HALO_DEBUG`.

#### HALO_GLOBAL

This variable is used in the example used to test the halo operations. If the variable is defined, the test are using arrays defined with the key `opt_global` set to `.true.`. Otherwise, the arrays are defined with the key set to `.false.`.

#### _GPU

This variable is automatically added in GPU builds.

#### _NCCL

This variable is valid only for GPU builds. The NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) implements multi-GPU and multi-node communication primitives optimized for NVIDIA GPUs and Networking.

## Optional dependencies

### ADIOS2

The library [adios2](https://adios2.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) can be used as a backend for IO. The version 2.9.0 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/ornladios/ADIOS2/archive/refs/tags/v2.9.0.tar.gz). Below are build instructions for the library. However, it is recommended to use the one provided by the administrators of the computing centre if available.

```
wget https://github.com/ornladios/ADIOS2/archive/refs/tags/v2.9.0.tar.gz
tar xzf v2.9.0.tar.gz
mkdir 2.9.0_tmp && cd 2.9.0_tmp
CC=mpicc CXX=mpicxx FC=mpif90 cmake -S ../ADIOS2-2.9.0 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../2.9.0_bld
make -j
make -j test
make -j install
```

To build 2DECOMP&FFT with the adios2 IO backend, one can provide the package configuration for adios2 
in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, 
this should be found under `/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2`. 
One can also provide the option `-Dadios2_DIR=/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2`. 
Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B ./build -DIO_BACKEND=adios2 -Dadios2_DIR=/path/to/adios2/install/lib/cmake/adios2
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`. Please note that the support for ADIOS2 is not complete. Currently, for a given IO operation, when the ADIOS2 backend is not supported, the MPI backend is used.

### FFTW

The library [fftw](http://www.fftw.org/index.html) can be used as a backend for the FFT engine. 
The version 3.3.10 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded 
[here](http://www.fftw.org/download.html). 
Please note that one should build fftw and decomp2d against the same compilers. 
For build instructions, please check [here](http://www.fftw.org/fftw3_doc/Installation-on-Unix.html). 
Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library in double precision 
(add `--enable-single` for a single precision build):

```
wget http://www.fftw.org/fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
tar xzf fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
mkdir fftw-3.3.10_tmp && cd fftw-3.3.10_tmp
../fftw-3.3.10/configure --prefix=xxxxxxx/fftw3/fftw-3.3.10_bld --enable-shared
make -j
make -j check
make install
```
Please note that the resulting build is not compatible with `cmake` 
(https://github.com/FFTW/fftw3/issues/130). 
As a workaround, one can open the file 
`/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/cmake/fftw3/FFTW3Config.cmake` 
and comment the line
```
include ("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/FFTW3LibraryDepends.cmake")
```

To build `2decomp&fft` against fftw3, one can provide the package configuration for fftw3 
in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, 
this should be found under `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/pkgconfig`. 
One can also provide the option `-DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install`. 
Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B build -DFFT_Choice=<fftw|fftw_f03> -DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`.

Note the legacy `fftw` interface lacks interface definitions 
and will fail when stricter compilation flags are used (e.g. when `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Dev`) 
for this it is recommended to use `fftw_f03` which provides proper interfaces.

### Caliper

The library [caliper](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper) can be used to profile the execution of the code. 
The version 2.9.1 was tested and is supported, version 2.8.0 has also been tested 
and is still expected to work. 
Please note that one must build caliper and decomp2d against the same C/C++/Fortran 
compilers and MPI libray. 
For build instructions, please check 
[here](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper#building-and-installing) 
and [here](https://software.llnl.gov/Caliper/CaliperBasics.html#build-and-install). 
Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library using the GNU compilers:

```
git clone https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper.git caliper_github
cd caliper_github
git checkout v2.9.1
mkdir build && cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../../caliper_build_2.9.1 -DWITH_FORTRAN=yes -DWITH_MPI=yes -DBUILD_TESTING=yes ../
make -j
make test
make install
```

After installing Caliper ensure to set `caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper`.
Following this the `2decomp-fft` build can be configured to use Caliper profiling as
```
cmake -S . -B -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
or by modifying the configuration to set `ENABLE_PROFILER=caliper` via `ccmake`.
