README.md, before:

# 2decomp-fft

## Building

### CMake

The build system is driven by `cmake`. It is good practice to directly point to the MPI Fortran wrapper that you would like to use to guarantee consistency between Fortran compiler and MPI. This can be done by setting the default Fortran environmental variable 
```
export FC=my_mpif90
```
To generate the build system run
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DOPTION1 -DOPTION2 ...
```
If the directory does not exist it will be generated and it will contain the configuration files. The configuration can be further
edited by using the `ccmake` utility as
```
ccmake $path_to_build_directory
```
and editing as desired, variables that are likely of interest are: `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` and `FFT_Choice`;
additional variables can be shown by entering "advanced mode" by pressing `t`.
By default a `RELEASE` build will built, other options for `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` are `DEBUG` and `DEV` which
turn on debugging flags and additionally try to catch coding errors at compile time, respectively.
The behaviour of debug and development versions of the library can be changed before the
initialization using the variable ``decomp_debug`` or the environment variable ``DECOMP_2D_DEBUG``.
The value provided with the environment variable must be a positive integer below 9999.

Two `BUILD_TARGETS` are available namely `mpi` and `gpu`.  For the `mpi` target no additional options should be required. whereas for `gpu` extra options are necessary at the configure stage. Please see section [GPU Compilation](#gpu-compilation)

Once the build system has been configured, you can build `2decomp&fft` by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory -j <nproc>
```
appending `-v` will display additional information about the build, such as compiler flags.

After building the library can be tested. Please see section [Testing and examples](#testing-and-examples)

Options can be added to change the level of verbosity. Finally, the build library can be installed by running 
```
cmake --install $path_to_build_directory
```
The default location for `libdecomp2d.a` is `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib`or  `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib64` unless the variable `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is modified.
The module files generated by the build process will similarly be installed to `$path_to_build_directory/opt/install`, users of the library should add this to the include paths for their program.

As indicated above, by default a static `libdecomp2d.a` will be compiled, if desired a shared library can be built by setting `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON` either on the command line:
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON
```
or by editing the configuration using `ccmake`.
This might be useful for a centralised install supporting multiple users that is upgraded over time.

Occasionally a clean build is required, this can be performed by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory --target clean
```

## Testing and examples

### CMake
By default build of the test is deactivated. To activate the testing the option `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` can be added or 
alternativey the option can be activated in the GUI interface `ccmake`.
After building the library can be tested by running
```
ctest --test-dir $path_to_build_directory
```
which uses the `ctest` utility. By default tests are performed in serial, but more than 1 rank can be used by setting `MPIEXEC_MAX_NUMPROCS` under `ccmake` utility.  
It is also possible to specify the decomposition by setting `PROW` and `PCOL` parameters at the configure stage or using `ccmake`. 
Consequently, the configure stage is forcing the number of MPI tasks `MPIEXEC_MAX_NUMPROCS` to be equal to the product of PROW times PCOL. 
Mesh resolution can also be imposed using the parameters `NX`, `NY` and `NZ`. 

For the GPU implementation please be aware that it is based on a single MPI rank per GPU. Therefore, to test multiple GPUs, use the maximum number of available GPUs on the system/node and not the maximum number of MPI tasks. 

## GPU compilation

The library can perform multi GPU offoloading using the NVHPC compiler suite for NVIDIA hardware. 
The implementation is based on CUDA-aware MPI and NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL).
The FFT is based on cuFFT. 

### CMake
To properly configure for GPU build the following needs to be used 
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_TARGET=gpu
```
By default CUDA aware MPI will be used together with `cuFFT` for the FFT library. The configure will automatically look for the GPU architecture available on the system. If you are building on a HPC system please use a computing node for the installation. Useful variables to be added are 

 - `-DENABLE_NCCL=yes` to activate the NCCL collectives
 - `-DENABLE_MANAGED=yes` to activate the automatic memory management form the NVHPC compiler
 - `-DSET_CUDA_ARCH=XY` to set the CUDA compute architecture (default is CC70, Volta V100)
If you are getting the following error
```
-- The CUDA compiler identification is unknown  
CMake Error at /usr/share/cmake/Modules/CMakeDetermineCUDACompiler.cmake:633 (message):  
Failed to detect a default CUDA architecture. 
```
It is possible that your default C compiler is too recent and not supported by `nvcc` . You might be able to solve the issue by adding 
 - `-DCMAKE_CUDA_HOST_COMPILER=$supported_gcc`
 
 At the moment the supported CUDA host compilers are `gcc11` and earlier. 

## Profiling

Profiling can be activated via `cmake` configuration, the recommended approach is to run the initial configuration as follows:
```
export caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper
export CXX=mpicxx
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
where `ENABLE_PROFILER` is set to the profiling tool desired, currently supported values are: `caliper`.
Note that when using `caliper` a C++ compiler is required as indicated in the above command line.

When the profiling is active, one can tune it before calling `decomp_2d_init` using the subroutine
`decomp_profiler_prep`. 
The input argument for this subroutine is a logical array of size 4. 
Each input allow activation / deactivation of the profiling as follows :

1. Profile transpose operations (default : true)
2. Profile IO operations (default : true)
3. Profile FFT operations (default : true)
4. Profile decomp_2d init / fin subroutines (default : true)

## FFT backends

The library provides a built-in FFT engine and supports various FFT backends : FFTW, Intel oneMKL, Nvidia cuFFT. The FFT engine selected during compilation is available through the variable `D2D_FFT_BACKEND` defined in the module `decomp_2d_fft`. The expected value is defined by the integer constants
```
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_GENERIC = 0   ! Built-in engine
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_FFTW3 = 1     ! FFTW
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_FFTW3_F03 = 2 ! FFTW (Fortran 2003)
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_MKL = 3       ! Intel oneMKL
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_CUFFT = 4     ! Nvidia cuFFT
```
exported by the module `decomp_2d_constants`.
The external code can use the named variables to check the FFT backend used in a given build.

### OVERWRITE flag

- The generic backend supports the OVERWRITE flag but it can not perform in-place transforms
- The FFTW3 and FFTW3_F03 backends support the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft
- The oneMKL backend supports the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft
- The cuFFT backend supports the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft

## Linking from external codes

### Codes using Makefiles

When building a code that links 2decomp-fft using a Makefile you will need to add the include and link paths as appropriate (`inlude/` and `lib/` under the installation directory, respectively).
```
DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

OBJ = my_exec.o

my_exec: $(OBJ)
	$(F90) -o $@ $(OBJ) $(LIBS)

```
In case 2decomp-fft has been compiled with an external FFT, such as FFTW3, `LIBS` should also contain the following 
```
FFTW3_PATH=/my_path_to_FFTW/lib
LIBFFT=-L$(FFTW3_PATH) -lfftw3 -lfftw3f
LIBS += $(LIBFFT)
```
In case of 2decomp-fft compiled for GPU with NVHPC, linking against cuFFT is mandatory 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft
```
In case of NCCL the following is required 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft,nccl 
```
It is also possible to drive the build and installation of 2decomp-fft from a Makefile such as in the following example code
```
FC = mpif90
BUILD = Release

DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

# Building libdecomp.a
$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a:
	FC=$(FC) cmake -S $(DECOMP_ROOT) -B $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=$(BUILD) -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target decomp2d
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target install

# Clean libdecomp.a
clean-decomp:
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target clean
	rm -f $(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a
```

## Miscellaneous

### Print the log to a file or to stdout

Before calling `decomp_2d_init`, the external code can modify the variable `decomp_log` to change the output for the log. The expected value is defined by the integer constants
```
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_QUIET = 0       ! No logging output
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_STDOUT = 1      ! Root rank logs output to stdout
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_TOFILE = 2      ! Root rank logs output to the file "decomp_2d_setup.log"
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_TOFILE_FULL = 3 ! All ranks log output to a dedicated file
```
exported by the `decomp_2d_constants` module.
Although their values are shown here, users should not rely on these and are recommended to prefer to use the named variables `D2D_LOG_QUIET`, etc. instead.
The default value used is `D2D_LOG_TOFILE` for the default build and `D2D_LOG_TOFILE_FULL` for a debug build.

### Change the debug level for debug builds

Before calling `decomp_2d_init`, the external code can modify the variable `decomp_debug` to change the debug level. The user can also modify this variable using the environment variable `DECOMP_2D_DEBUG`. Please note that the environment variable is processed only for debug builds. The expected value for the variable `decomp_debug` is some integer between 0 and 6, bounds included.

### List of preprocessor variables

#### DEBUG

This variable is automatically added in debug and dev builds. Extra information is printed when it is present.

#### DOUBLE_PREC

When this variable is not present, the library uses single precision. When it is present, the library uses double precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `DOUBLE_PRECISION`.

#### SAVE_SINGLE

This variable is valid for double precision builds only. When it is present, snapshots are written in single precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `SINGLE_PRECISION_OUTPUT`.

#### PROFILER

This variable is automatically added when selecting the profiler. It activates the profiling sections of the code.

#### EVEN

This preprocessor variable is not valid for GPU builds. It leads to padded alltoall operations.

#### OVERWRITE

This variable leads to overwrite the input array when computing FFT. The support of this flag does not always correspond to in-place transforms, depending on the FFT backend selected, as described above. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `ENABLE_INPLACE`.

#### HALO_DEBUG

This variable is used to debug the halo operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `HALO_DEBUG`.

#### _GPU

This variable is automatically added in GPU builds.

#### _NCCL

This variable is valid only for GPU builds. The NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) implements multi-GPU and multi-node communication primitives optimized for NVIDIA GPUs and Networking.

### Code formatting

The code is formatted using the `fprettify` program (available via `pip`), to ensure consistency of use there is a script file `scripts/format.sh` which will run `fprettify` across the 2decomp&fft source, you can also use the `format` build target to run the script.
It is recommended that you should format the code before making a pull request.

## Optional dependencies

### FFTW

The library [fftw](http://www.fftw.org/index.html) can be used as a backend for the FFT engine. The version 3.3.10 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded [here](http://www.fftw.org/download.html). Please note that one should build fftw and decomp2d against the same compilers. For build instructions, please check [here](http://www.fftw.org/fftw3_doc/Installation-on-Unix.html). Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library in double precision (add `--enable-single` for a single precision build):

```
wget http://www.fftw.org/fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
tar xzf fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
mkdir fftw-3.3.10_tmp && cd fftw-3.3.10_tmp
../fftw-3.3.10/configure --prefix=xxxxxxx/fftw3/fftw-3.3.10_bld --enable-shared
make -j
make -j check
make install
```
Please note that the resulting build is not compatible with CMake (https://github.com/FFTW/fftw3/issues/130). As a workaround, one can open the file `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/cmake/fftw3/FFTW3Config.cmake` and comment the line
```
include ("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/FFTW3LibraryDepends.cmake")
```

To build `2decomp&fft` against fftw3, one can provide the package configuration for fftw3 in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, this should be found under `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/pkgconfig`. One can also provide the option `-DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install`. Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B build -DFFT_Choice=<fftw|fftw_f03> -DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`.

Note the legacy `fftw` interface lacks interface definitions and will fail when stricter compilation flags are used (e.g. when `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Dev`) for this it is recommended to use `fftw_f03` which provides proper interfaces.

### Caliper

The library [caliper](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper) can be used to profile the execution of the code. The version 2.9.1 was tested and is supported, version 2.8.0 has also been tested and is still expected to work. Please note that one must build caliper and decomp2d against the same C/C++/Fortran compilers and MPI libray. For build instructions, please check [here](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper#building-and-installing) and [here](https://software.llnl.gov/Caliper/CaliperBasics.html#build-and-install). Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library using the GNU compilers:

```
git clone https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper.git caliper_github
cd caliper_github
git checkout v2.9.1
mkdir build && cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../../caliper_build_2.9.1 -DWITH_FORTRAN=yes -DWITH_MPI=yes -DBUILD_TESTING=yes ../
make -j
make test
make install
```

After installing Caliper ensure to set `caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper`.
Following this the `2decomp-fft` build can be configured to use Caliper profiling as
```
cmake -S . -B -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
or by modifying the configuration to set `ENABLE_PROFILER=caliper` via `ccmake`.

Commit message:

Provide required / tested versions for various requirements and optional libraries

README.md, after:

# 2decomp-fft

## Building

The library 2decomp is a Fortran library compatible with the Fortran 2008 standard.
It requires a MPI library compatible with MPI-2.0 with extended Fortran support.
The following [optional libraries](#optional-dependencies) can be used :

- FFTW3, version 3.3.10 was tested
- Intel oneMKL (oneAPI Math Kernel Library), version 2023.0.0 was tested
- Nvidia GPU-related libraries, NVHPC version 22.7 and CUDA version 11.8 were tested
- Caliper, version 2.9.1 was tested

### CMake

The build system is driven by `cmake`. It is good practice to directly point to the MPI Fortran wrapper that you would like to use to guarantee consistency between Fortran compiler and MPI. This can be done by setting the default Fortran environmental variable 
```
export FC=my_mpif90
```
To generate the build system run
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DOPTION1 -DOPTION2 ...
```
If the directory does not exist it will be generated and it will contain the configuration files. The configuration can be further
edited by using the `ccmake` utility as
```
ccmake $path_to_build_directory
```
and editing as desired, variables that are likely of interest are: `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` and `FFT_Choice`;
additional variables can be shown by entering "advanced mode" by pressing `t`.
By default a `RELEASE` build will built, other options for `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` are `DEBUG` and `DEV` which
turn on debugging flags and additionally try to catch coding errors at compile time, respectively.
The behaviour of debug and development versions of the library can be changed before the
initialization using the variable ``decomp_debug`` or the environment variable ``DECOMP_2D_DEBUG``.
The value provided with the environment variable must be a positive integer below 9999.

Two `BUILD_TARGETS` are available namely `mpi` and `gpu`.  For the `mpi` target no additional options should be required. whereas for `gpu` extra options are necessary at the configure stage. Please see section [GPU Compilation](#gpu-compilation)

Once the build system has been configured, you can build `2decomp&fft` by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory -j <nproc>
```
appending `-v` will display additional information about the build, such as compiler flags.

After building the library can be tested. Please see section [Testing and examples](#testing-and-examples)

Options can be added to change the level of verbosity. Finally, the build library can be installed by running 
```
cmake --install $path_to_build_directory
```
The default location for `libdecomp2d.a` is `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib`or  `$path_to_build_directory/opt/lib64` unless the variable `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is modified.
The module files generated by the build process will similarly be installed to `$path_to_build_directory/opt/install`, users of the library should add this to the include paths for their program.

As indicated above, by default a static `libdecomp2d.a` will be compiled, if desired a shared library can be built by setting `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON` either on the command line:
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON
```
or by editing the configuration using `ccmake`.
This might be useful for a centralised install supporting multiple users that is upgraded over time.

Occasionally a clean build is required, this can be performed by running
```
cmake --build $path_to_build_directory --target clean
```

## Testing and examples

### CMake
By default build of the test is deactivated. To activate the testing the option `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` can be added or 
alternativey the option can be activated in the GUI interface `ccmake`.
After building the library can be tested by running
```
ctest --test-dir $path_to_build_directory
```
which uses the `ctest` utility. By default tests are performed in serial, but more than 1 rank can be used by setting `MPIEXEC_MAX_NUMPROCS` under `ccmake` utility.  
It is also possible to specify the decomposition by setting `PROW` and `PCOL` parameters at the configure stage or using `ccmake`. 
Consequently, the configure stage is forcing the number of MPI tasks `MPIEXEC_MAX_NUMPROCS` to be equal to the product of PROW times PCOL. 
Mesh resolution can also be imposed using the parameters `NX`, `NY` and `NZ`. 

For the GPU implementation please be aware that it is based on a single MPI rank per GPU. Therefore, to test multiple GPUs, use the maximum number of available GPUs on the system/node and not the maximum number of MPI tasks. 

## GPU compilation

The library can perform multi GPU offoloading using the NVHPC compiler suite for NVIDIA hardware. 
The implementation is based on CUDA-aware MPI and NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL).
The FFT is based on cuFFT. 

### CMake
To properly configure for GPU build the following needs to be used 
```
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DBUILD_TARGET=gpu
```
By default CUDA aware MPI will be used together with `cuFFT` for the FFT library. The configure will automatically look for the GPU architecture available on the system. If you are building on a HPC system please use a computing node for the installation. Useful variables to be added are 

 - `-DENABLE_NCCL=yes` to activate the NCCL collectives
 - `-DENABLE_MANAGED=yes` to activate the automatic memory management form the NVHPC compiler
 - `-DSET_CUDA_ARCH=XY` to set the CUDA compute architecture (default is CC70, Volta V100)
If you are getting the following error
```
-- The CUDA compiler identification is unknown  
CMake Error at /usr/share/cmake/Modules/CMakeDetermineCUDACompiler.cmake:633 (message):  
Failed to detect a default CUDA architecture. 
```
It is possible that your default C compiler is too recent and not supported by `nvcc` . You might be able to solve the issue by adding 
 - `-DCMAKE_CUDA_HOST_COMPILER=$supported_gcc`
 
 At the moment the supported CUDA host compilers are `gcc11` and earlier. 

## Profiling

Profiling can be activated via `cmake` configuration, the recommended approach is to run the initial configuration as follows:
```
export caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper
export CXX=mpicxx
cmake -S $path_to_sources -B $path_to_build_directory -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
where `ENABLE_PROFILER` is set to the profiling tool desired, currently supported values are: `caliper`.
Note that when using `caliper` a C++ compiler is required as indicated in the above command line.

When the profiling is active, one can tune it before calling `decomp_2d_init` using the subroutine
`decomp_profiler_prep`. 
The input argument for this subroutine is a logical array of size 4. 
Each input allow activation / deactivation of the profiling as follows :

1. Profile transpose operations (default : true)
2. Profile IO operations (default : true)
3. Profile FFT operations (default : true)
4. Profile decomp_2d init / fin subroutines (default : true)

## FFT backends

The library provides a built-in FFT engine and supports various FFT backends : FFTW, Intel oneMKL, Nvidia cuFFT. The FFT engine selected during compilation is available through the variable `D2D_FFT_BACKEND` defined in the module `decomp_2d_fft`. The expected value is defined by the integer constants
```
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_GENERIC = 0   ! Built-in engine
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_FFTW3 = 1     ! FFTW
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_FFTW3_F03 = 2 ! FFTW (Fortran 2003)
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_MKL = 3       ! Intel oneMKL
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_FFT_BACKEND_CUFFT = 4     ! Nvidia cuFFT
```
exported by the module `decomp_2d_constants`.
The external code can use the named variables to check the FFT backend used in a given build.

### OVERWRITE flag

- The generic backend supports the OVERWRITE flag but it can not perform in-place transforms
- The FFTW3 and FFTW3_F03 backends support the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft
- The oneMKL backend supports the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft
- The cuFFT backend supports the OVERWRITE flag and can perform in-place complex 1D fft

## Linking from external codes

### Codes using Makefiles

When building a code that links 2decomp-fft using a Makefile you will need to add the include and link paths as appropriate (`inlude/` and `lib/` under the installation directory, respectively).
```
DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

OBJ = my_exec.o

my_exec: $(OBJ)
	$(F90) -o $@ $(OBJ) $(LIBS)

```
In case 2decomp-fft has been compiled with an external FFT, such as FFTW3, `LIBS` should also contain the following 
```
FFTW3_PATH=/my_path_to_FFTW/lib
LIBFFT=-L$(FFTW3_PATH) -lfftw3 -lfftw3f
LIBS += $(LIBFFT)
```
In case of 2decomp-fft compiled for GPU with NVHPC, linking against cuFFT is mandatory 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft
```
In case of NCCL the following is required 
```
LIBS += -cudalib=cufft,nccl 
```
It is also possible to drive the build and installation of 2decomp-fft from a Makefile such as in the following example code
```
FC = mpif90
BUILD = Release

DECOMP_ROOT = /path/to/2decomp-fft
DECOMP_BUILD_DIR = $(DECOMP_ROOT)/build
DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR ?= $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR)/opt # Use default unless set by user

INC += -I$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/include

# Users build/link targets
LIBS = -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib64 -L$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib -ldecomp2d

# Building libdecomp.a
$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a:
	FC=$(FC) cmake -S $(DECOMP_ROOT) -B $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=$(BUILD) -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target decomp2d
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target install

# Clean libdecomp.a
clean-decomp:
	cmake --build $(DECOMP_BUILD_DIR) --target clean
	rm -f $(DECOMP_INSTALL_DIR)/lib/libdecomp.a
```

## Miscellaneous

### Print the log to a file or to stdout

Before calling `decomp_2d_init`, the external code can modify the variable `decomp_log` to change the output for the log. The expected value is defined by the integer constants
```
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_QUIET = 0       ! No logging output
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_STDOUT = 1      ! Root rank logs output to stdout
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_TOFILE = 2      ! Root rank logs output to the file "decomp_2d_setup.log"
integer, parameter, public :: D2D_LOG_TOFILE_FULL = 3 ! All ranks log output to a dedicated file
```
exported by the `decomp_2d_constants` module.
Although their values are shown here, users should not rely on these and are recommended to prefer to use the named variables `D2D_LOG_QUIET`, etc. instead.
The default value used is `D2D_LOG_TOFILE` for the default build and `D2D_LOG_TOFILE_FULL` for a debug build.

### Change the debug level for debug builds

Before calling `decomp_2d_init`, the external code can modify the variable `decomp_debug` to change the debug level. The user can also modify this variable using the environment variable `DECOMP_2D_DEBUG`. Please note that the environment variable is processed only for debug builds. The expected value for the variable `decomp_debug` is some integer between 0 and 6, bounds included.

### List of preprocessor variables

#### DEBUG

This variable is automatically added in debug and dev builds. Extra information is printed when it is present.

#### DOUBLE_PREC

When this variable is not present, the library uses single precision. When it is present, the library uses double precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `DOUBLE_PRECISION`.

#### SAVE_SINGLE

This variable is valid for double precision builds only. When it is present, snapshots are written in single precision. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `SINGLE_PRECISION_OUTPUT`.

#### PROFILER

This variable is automatically added when selecting the profiler. It activates the profiling sections of the code.

#### EVEN

This preprocessor variable is not valid for GPU builds. It leads to padded alltoall operations.

#### OVERWRITE

This variable leads to overwrite the input array when computing FFT. The support of this flag does not always correspond to in-place transforms, depending on the FFT backend selected, as described above. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `ENABLE_INPLACE`.

#### HALO_DEBUG

This variable is used to debug the halo operations. This preprocessor variable is driven by the CMake on/off variable `HALO_DEBUG`.

#### _GPU

This variable is automatically added in GPU builds.

#### _NCCL

This variable is valid only for GPU builds. The NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) implements multi-GPU and multi-node communication primitives optimized for NVIDIA GPUs and Networking.

### Code formatting

The code is formatted using the `fprettify` program (available via `pip`), to ensure consistency of use there is a script file `scripts/format.sh` which will run `fprettify` across the 2decomp&fft source, you can also use the `format` build target to run the script.
It is recommended that you should format the code before making a pull request.

## Optional dependencies

### FFTW

The library [fftw](http://www.fftw.org/index.html) can be used as a backend for the FFT engine. The version 3.3.10 was tested, is supported and can be downloaded [here](http://www.fftw.org/download.html). Please note that one should build fftw and decomp2d against the same compilers. For build instructions, please check [here](http://www.fftw.org/fftw3_doc/Installation-on-Unix.html). Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library in double precision (add `--enable-single` for a single precision build):

```
wget http://www.fftw.org/fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
tar xzf fftw-3.3.10.tar.gz
mkdir fftw-3.3.10_tmp && cd fftw-3.3.10_tmp
../fftw-3.3.10/configure --prefix=xxxxxxx/fftw3/fftw-3.3.10_bld --enable-shared
make -j
make -j check
make install
```
Please note that the resulting build is not compatible with CMake (https://github.com/FFTW/fftw3/issues/130). As a workaround, one can open the file `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/cmake/fftw3/FFTW3Config.cmake` and comment the line
```
include ("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/FFTW3LibraryDepends.cmake")
```

To build `2decomp&fft` against fftw3, one can provide the package configuration for fftw3 in the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, this should be found under `/path/to/fftw3/install/lib/pkgconfig`. One can also provide the option `-DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install`. Then either specify on the command line when configuring the build
```
cmake -S . -B build -DFFT_Choice=<fftw|fftw_f03> -DFFTW_ROOT=/path/to/fftw3/install
```
or modify the build configuration using `ccmake`.

Note the legacy `fftw` interface lacks interface definitions and will fail when stricter compilation flags are used (e.g. when `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Dev`) for this it is recommended to use `fftw_f03` which provides proper interfaces.

### Caliper

The library [caliper](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper) can be used to profile the execution of the code. The version 2.9.1 was tested and is supported, version 2.8.0 has also been tested and is still expected to work. Please note that one must build caliper and decomp2d against the same C/C++/Fortran compilers and MPI libray. For build instructions, please check [here](https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper#building-and-installing) and [here](https://software.llnl.gov/Caliper/CaliperBasics.html#build-and-install). Below is a suggestion for the compilation of the library using the GNU compilers:

```
git clone https://github.com/LLNL/Caliper.git caliper_github
cd caliper_github
git checkout v2.9.1
mkdir build && cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../../caliper_build_2.9.1 -DWITH_FORTRAN=yes -DWITH_MPI=yes -DBUILD_TESTING=yes ../
make -j
make test
make install
```

After installing Caliper ensure to set `caliper_DIR=/path/to/caliper/install/share/cmake/caliper`.
Following this the `2decomp-fft` build can be configured to use Caliper profiling as
```
cmake -S . -B -DENABLE_PROFILER=caliper
```
or by modifying the configuration to set `ENABLE_PROFILER=caliper` via `ccmake`.
